USF-3668: Storefront Architecture and Backend options docs (#765)
commerce-docs/microsite-commerce-storefront: src/content/docs/get-started/architecture.mdx

---
title: Architecture
description: Understand how Edge Delivery Services, the Adobe Commerce boilerplate, drop-in components, and Commerce APIs connect.
---

import Aside from '@components/Aside.astro';
import CardGrid from '@components/CardGrid.astro';
import Diagram from '@components/Diagram.astro';
import Link from '@components/Link.astro';
import LinkCard from '@components/LinkCard.astro';
import TableWrapper from '@components/TableWrapper.astro';

> Edge Delivery Services hosts your site. **Commerce blocks** use the boilerplate and **drop-in components** to reach your Commerce backend and services. **Content blocks** do not. This topic shows the overall architecture, then explains how each part fits together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edge Delivery Services hosts your site. **Commerce blocks** use the boilerplate and **drop-in components** to reach your Commerce backend and services. This topic shows the overall architecture, then explains how each part fits together.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Edge Delivery Services hosts your site. The boilerplate uses **Commerce blocks** and **drop-in components/functions** to reach your Commerce backend and services. This topic shows the overall architecture, then explains how each part fits together.
```

I will add to Carlos' suggestion - I think it sounds weird to say the commerce blocks "use the boilerplate".

</Aside>

## Storefront

The **storefront** is the shopper-facing layer of Adobe Commerce: it renders the UI and connects to Commerce and services through APIs. On Edge Delivery Services, you build that experience with **Commerce blocks**, **drop-in components**, and the Adobe Commerce boilerplate.

**Edge Delivery Services** is a cloud-based content delivery network (CDN) that provides a scalable, secure, and high-performance platform for delivering your storefront to customers. It delivers content at the edge—close to the end user—to reduce latency and improve performance. Adobe Commerce storefronts on Edge Delivery Services support document-based authoring, enabling business users to manage content without developer involvement.

For the Quick Start path from concepts to deployment, see [Get started](/get-started/). For a hands-on walkthrough, see [Create a storefront](/get-started/create-storefront/).

## How the storefront parts fit together

This section explains how **authoring**, **blocks**, **drop-in components**, and **your repository** work together so the rest of this topic is easier to follow.

<Diagram type="mermaid" code={`
flowchart TB

>     Table["<b>Document table</b><br/>Authored in DA.live or Universal Editor"]

Reviewer 2: At first this diagram was a bit odd to me but I understand what you were trying to represent. 

I would like to get feedback from others, perhaps those with less understanding of how things fit together, because I worry my prior experience is making this diagram seem more approachable than it is. No offense 😆

    Table -->|"EDS transforms to HTML"| Block["<b>HTML block</b><br/>&lt;div class='block-name'&gt;"]
    Block --> ContentPath["<b>Content block</b><br/>Hero, card, column<br/>Stays presentational"]
    Block --> CommercePath["<b>Commerce block</b><br/>Cart, checkout, PDP<br/>Decorator runs in browser"]
    CommercePath -->|"mounts"| DropIn["<b>Drop-in component</b><br/>@dropins/storefront-* or @dropins/b2b-*<br/>UI + Commerce logic"]
    DropIn -->|"API calls from browser"| API["<b>Adobe Commerce APIs</b><br/>GraphQL · REST · Services"]
    Boilerplate["<b>Your repository</b><br/>decorators · initializers · config.json"]
    CommercePath -.->|"decorator loaded from"| Boilerplate
    Boilerplate -.->|"initializes"| DropIn
    classDef eds fill:#e8f5e9,stroke:#4caf50
    classDef commerce fill:#e3f2fd,stroke:#2196f3
    classDef api fill:#fff3e0,stroke:#ff9800
    class Table,Block,ContentPath eds
    class CommercePath,DropIn,Boilerplate commerce
    class API api

> `} caption="A document table authors both content and commerce blocks through the same EDS pipeline. Content blocks stay presentational. Commerce blocks load drop-in components through the boilerplate, which calls Adobe Commerce APIs directly from the browser." />

Reviewer 2: What is "a document table" hmm.

</TableWrapper>

### Commerce Storefront SDK

Drop-in components are built on shared **Commerce Storefront SDK** patterns—initialization, rendering, slots, and extension hooks—so behavior and structure stay consistent across cart, checkout, product discovery, and the rest of the set.

- [Commerce Storefront SDK](/sdk/) — Reference for APIs, design components, and utilities used across drop-in components  
- [Drop-ins introduction](/dropins/all/introduction/) — Full map of B2C and B2B drop-in components and how they install into the boilerplate  

Terminology for **Commerce blocks**, **drop-in components**, and **content blocks** also appears in the [Boilerplate getting started](/boilerplate/getting-started/) vocabulary.

## The big picture

The figure below shows the high-level composable story: content and commerce both publish through Edge Delivery Services.

<Diagram caption="Composable architecture of a headless Adobe Commerce storefront on Edge Delivery Services.">
  ![Composable architecture of a headless Adobe Commerce storefront on Edge Delivery

>   Services.](@images/implementation/Architecture.svg)

Reviewer: I don't know if this diagram is correct anymore. Catalog Services, Live Search, and PREX are inside "Adobe Commerce Optimizer". Is that the case for ACCS? PaaS? @sirugh, thoughts? Should just make this more generic and remove "ACO" from the title of that box?

> Although not shown in this diagram, API Mesh for Adobe Developer App Builder

@bdenham, I can give you access to this diagram in case you don't have it.

Reviewer: @bdenham, you also have another diagram in "How the pieces connect". Should we just use that one and remove the "The Big Picture" section altogether?

Reviewer 2: I'm ok with diagrams if they are all independently useful. In this case, the "big picture" and "pieces connect" diagrams seem duplicative.

 The other two also seem duplicative:

<img width="976" height="675" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b6cd6a12-392a-48f1-8a0a-61b81ee7fc51" />

<img width="1061" height="183" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/637269e6-10c4-4cd5-9aed-898db11b5c49" />

Reviewer 2: As for the main diagram we are discussing here, it could be changed. I don't know what "commerce pages" are. I'd also move the EDS box to the top. I'd make the grey box(es) to the right or left of the orange ones. I'd make the grey boxes the height of orange and blue together. 

As for the split between ACCS, ACO - I think it's probably fine to leave as is. It's probably more nuanced. If you wanted, you could get feedback from Anton.

Author: @fnhipster Send me a link to the original diagram. I'll think through all of them again.

Author: I removed the big picture diagram for with this pass.

    class Optimizer optimizer
`} caption="Edge Delivery Services serves every page. Content blocks (Block Collection) are presentational only. Commerce blocks load drop-in components through the Adobe Commerce boilerplate, which connects to your backend and shared Commerce services. Configuration differs by backend type—see [Backend options](/get-started/backends/) for details." />

When you understand how the pieces fit together, align your storefront with your Commerce backend using [Commerce configuration](/setup/configuration/commerce-configuration/). For backend types and prerequisites, see [Backend options](/get-started/backends/).

## How a page loads

Understanding how content transforms into rendered commerce experiences helps you know where to customize and integrate. The [system stack diagram](#how-the-pieces-connect) is structural. This diagram adds the time dimension: what happens from document authoring to a Commerce API call when the page loads. The sequence reads left to right (author → Edge Delivery Services → browser → decorator → drop-in → Commerce API).

<Diagram type="mermaid" code={`
graph LR
    A["Author<br/><small>Creates table</small>"]

>     B["Edge Delivery Services<br/><small>Server-side transform</small>"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    B["Edge Delivery Services<br/><small>Publishes page</small>"]
```

`} caption="Flow from authoring to rendering: document table → HTML → block decoration → drop-in initialization → GraphQL fetch." />

### Runtime flow

An author creates a table (for example, Commerce Cart) in a document or uses in-context editing. Edge Delivery Services transforms it to HTML (`<div class="commerce-cart">`). The browser loads the HTML, the block decorator initializes the drop-in, and the drop-in fetches from the Commerce API to render UI.

<Aside type="tip" title="What you'll touch">
Your storefront project has three moving parts: the **boilerplate** (config + blocks), **drop-in components** (commerce UI), and **Commerce services** (APIs). The sections below explain each one.
</Aside>

## Boilerplate and blocks

### Commerce blocks

The <Link href="https://github.com/hlxsites/aem-boilerplate-commerce" text="Commerce Boilerplate" /> has four layers:

- **scripts.js** — Page load, block decoration, fonts
- **commerce.js** — Backend connections, templates, data layer
- **initializers** — Cart, checkout, account, and more
- **blocks** — Content blocks (Cards, Columns, Headers) and Commerce blocks (cart, checkout, account)

> Commerce blocks use Commerce APIs; the boilerplate uses <Link href="https://preactjs.com/" text="Preact" />/HTM for complex state. See [Getting started](/boilerplate/getting-started/) for file structure.

Reviewer: I think this whole sentence is misleading.

Commerce Blocks integrate with Commerce via GraphQL and are powered by drop-ins. The boilerplate doesn't utilize preact.

</Task>
</Tasks>
- **scripts.js** — Page load, block decoration, fonts
- **commerce.js** — Backend connections, templates, data layer
- **initializers** — Cart, checkout, account, and more
- **blocks** — Content blocks (Cards, Columns, Headers) and Commerce blocks (cart, checkout, account)

## Edge Delivery Services
Commerce blocks use Commerce APIs; the boilerplate uses <Link href="https://preactjs.com/" text="Preact" />/HTM for complex state. See [Getting started](/boilerplate/getting-started/) for file structure.

Edge Delivery Services is a cloud-based content delivery network (CDN) that provides a scalable, secure, and high-performance platform for delivering your Adobe Commerce storefront to customers around the world. It is designed to deliver dynamic content at the edge, close to the end user, to reduce latency and improve performance.
#### Customize

## Commerce Boilerplate Architecture
[Blocks reference](/boilerplate/blocks-reference/) · [Blocks configuration](/boilerplate/configuration/) · [Storefront configuration](/setup/configuration/commerce-configuration/)

> The Commerce Boilerplate follows a modular architecture that separates core AEM functionality from commerce-specific features. This separation ensures maintainability and alignment with the upstream AEM Boilerplate while providing robust commerce capabilities.

Reviewer: Why are we removing this? No relevant?

Author: The content wasn't actually removed. It was rewritten and absorbed into the opening paragraph of the "Key files and folders" section.

> <Aside type="note" title="Existing storefront?">

Reviewer: Should we briefly mention when Luma Bridge is recommended and when it isn't? For example, “In some cases like x and y, you may need to bridge your existing Luma storefront with Edge Delivery, go here for that.”

Reviewer: <img width="1020" height="607" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e06e49b0-c488-4052-a322-a765a05b0a93" />

The Luma Bridge appears connected to Drop-ins, but it isn't. It's actually the other way around.

#### Content blocks

Content blocks provide layout and marketing UI for **non-commerce** pages on the storefront. They include Cards, Columns, Headers, Footers, and more from the <Link href="https://www.aem.live/developer/block-collection" text="Block Collection" />. Edge Delivery renders them as HTML and optional decoration. Developers can enrich them with semantic HTML, accessibility attributes, and dynamic DOM transformations. They do not mount drop-in components or call Adobe Commerce GraphQL.

#### Commerce blocks

Commerce blocks enable Adobe Commerce experiences (cart, checkout, account, and more). They use the same document-based authoring model as content blocks, but the boilerplate maps them to initializers and `@dropins/*` packages. They render interactive storefront UIs, load data through Adobe Commerce GraphQL and related APIs, and are typically more complex because they coordinate with Commerce services.

> Commerce blocks that need complex client-side state and multiple render states can follow the buildless <Link href="https://preactjs.com/" text="Preact" /> and <Link href="https://github.com/developit/htm" text="HTM" /> patterns used in the boilerplate. Otherwise, prefer plain JavaScript. React is possible but not recommended—its bundle size and execution overhead make it difficult to achieve a 100 Lighthouse score. For a short rule of thumb, see [Libraries](/troubleshooting/faq/#libraries) in the storefront FAQ. Use the existing blocks in the Commerce boilerplate as a reference—for example, the teaser and product recommendations blocks.

Reviewer: Can you point me to the Preact/HTM example in the Boilerplate? We removed those about a year ago. You can remove this section.

Author: @fnhipster Do you think it's useful to keep the latter part of that paragraph?

> Prefer plain JavaScript for Commerce blocks. React is possible but not recommended—its bundle size and execution overhead make it difficult to achieve a 100 Lighthouse score. For a short rule of thumb, see [Libraries](/troubleshooting/faq/#libraries) in the storefront FAQ. Use the existing blocks in the Commerce boilerplate as a reference—for example, the teaser and product recommendations blocks.

    Cart -->|"cart/updated, cart/data"| EB
    Checkout -->|"checkout/updated"| EB
    Order -->|"order/placed, cart/reset"| EB
    YourCode -->|"locale, authenticated"| EB

    EB -.->|"authenticated"| Cart
    EB -.->|"authenticated"| Checkout
    EB -.->|"cart/updated, cart/data"| Checkout
    EB -.->|"cart/initialized"| Checkout
    EB -.->|"order/placed"| Cart
    EB -.->|"cart/updated"| Account

    linkStyle 0,1,2,3,4,5 stroke:#3b82f6,stroke-width:2px
    linkStyle 6,7,8,9,10,11 stroke:#6366f1,stroke-width:1.5px,stroke-dasharray:5

    style EB fill:#fef3c7,stroke:#f59e0b,stroke-width:3px
    style Auth fill:#f3e8ff,stroke:#a855f7,stroke-width:2px
    style PDP fill:#dbeafe,stroke:#3b82f6,stroke-width:2px
    style Cart fill:#dbeafe,stroke:#3b82f6,stroke-width:2px
    style Checkout fill:#e0e7ff,stroke:#6366f1,stroke-width:2px
    style Order fill:#e0e7ff,stroke:#6366f1,stroke-width:2px
    style Account fill:#f3e8ff,stroke:#a855f7,stroke-width:2px
    style YourCode fill:#fce7f3,stroke:#ec4899,stroke-width:2px
`} caption="Solid arrows: events emitted. Dashed arrows: events consumed. Your custom code (pink) can emit and listen to events alongside drop-in components." />

> - **`events.on(name, handler)`** — subscribe; returns a subscription handle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`events.on(name, handler, options)`** — subscribe; returns a subscription handle
```
